



Network Working Group                                           J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Best Current Practice                        S. Farrell
Expires: 2 August 2021                            Trinity College Dublin
                                                            M. Kühlewind
                                                                Ericsson
                                                              C. Perkins
                                                   University of Glasgow
                                                         29 January 2021


       Report from the IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 2020
                   draft-iab-covid19-workshop-latest

Abstract

   The COVID-19 pandemic caused changes in Internet traffic,
   particularly during the introduction of the initial quarantine and
   work-from-home arrangements.

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) held a workshop to discuss
   Network Impacts of the pandemic, on November 9-13, 2020.  The
   workshop was held to convene interested researchers, network
   operators, and network management experts, and Internet technologists
   to share their experiences.  The meeting was held online given the
   on-going travel and contact restrictions at that time.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/intarchboard/covid19-workshop.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   This Internet-Draft will expire on 2 August 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Discussion Topics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Measurement-based Observation on Network Traffic
           Dynamics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.1.1.  Overall traffic growth  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.1.2.  Changes in traffic patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.1.3.  A deeper look at interconnections . . . . . . . . . .   6
       3.1.4.  Cloud platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       3.1.5.  Last mile congestion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.1.6.  Home network performance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.1.7.  User behaviour  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  Operational Practises and Changes . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       3.2.1.  Digital Divide  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       3.2.2.  Applications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       3.2.3.  Observability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.3.  Architectural Consideration and Conclusion for Future . .   9
       3.3.1.  DSCP point and counterpoint . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       3.3.2.  Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       3.3.3.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.3.4.  Feedback on meeting format  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     3.4.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  Position Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Workshop participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Program Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17





Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


1.  Introduction

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) held a workshop to discuss
   Network Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, on November 9-13, 2020.
   The workshop was held to convene interested researchers, network
   operators, and network management experts, and Internet technologists
   to share their experiences.  The meeting was held online given the
   on-going travel and contact restrictions at that time.

   COVID-19 has caused changes in Internet traffic.  These changes
   appeared rather abruptly and were significant, in particular during
   the introduction of the initial quarantine and work-from-home
   arrangements.  The changes relate to traffic volumes, location of
   traffic, as well as the types of traffic and applications used.

   Announcement for the workshop was sent out in July 2020, requesting
   interested parties to submit position papers for the workshop program
   committee.  A total of 15 position papers were received from
   altogether 33 authors.  The papers are listed in Section 4.  In
   addition, several other types of contributions and pointers to
   existing work were provided.  A number of position papers referred to
   parallel work being published in measurement-related academic
   conferences.

   Invitations for the workshop were sent out based on the position
   papers and other expressions of interest.  On the workshop conference
   calls were 45 participants, listed in Section 5.

   The workshop was held over one week hosting three sessions covering
   measurements and observations, operational issue, and final future
   consideration and conclusions.  As these three sessions were
   scheduled Monday, Wednesday, and Friday a positive side effect was
   that the time in between could be used for mailing list discussion
   and compilation of additional workshop material.

2.  Scope

   The COVID-19 pandemic has had a tremendous impact on people's lives
   and the societies and economies around the globe.  But it also had
   big impact on networking.  With large numbers of people working from
   home or otherwise depending on the network for their daily lives,
   network traffic has surged.  Internet service providers and operators
   have reported 20% traffic growth or more in a matter of weeks.
   Traffic in Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) is similarly on the rise.
   Most forms of network traffic have seen an increase, with
   conversational multimedia traffic growing in some cases more than
   200%. And user time spent on conferencing services has risen by an
   order of magnitude on some conferencing platforms.



Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   In general, the Internet has coped relatively well with this traffic
   growth, albeit not without some issues.  For instance, some outages,
   video quality reduction, and other issues were reported.
   Nevertheless, it is interesting to see how the technology, operators
   and service providers have been able to respond to large changes in
   traffic patterns.

   Understanding what actually happened with Internet traffic is of
   course interesting by its own right.  How that impacted user
   experience, or the intended function of the services is equally
   interesting.  Measurements and reports of traffic situation from 2020
   are therefore valuable.  But it would also be interesting to
   understand what types of network management and capacity expansion
   actions were taken in general.  Anecdotal evidence points to Internet
   and service providers tracking how their services are used, and in
   many cases adjusting services to accommodate the new traffic
   patterns, from dynamic allocation of compute resources to more
   complex changes.

   The impacts of this crisis are also a potential opportunity to
   understand the impact of traffic shifts and growth more generally, or
   to prepare for future situations -- crisis or otherwise - that impact
   networking.  Or even allow us to adjust the technology to be even
   better suited to respond to changes.

   The scope included:

   *  measurements about traffic changes, user experience, service
      performance, and other relevant aspects

   *  discussion about the behind the scenes network management and
      expansion activities

   *  experiences in the fields of general Internet connectivity,
      conferencing, media/entertainment, and Internet infrastructure

   *  lessons learned for preparedness and operations

   *  lessons learned for Internet technology and architecture

3.  Discussion Topics










Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


3.1.  Measurement-based Observation on Network Traffic Dynamics

   The workshop started with a focus on measurements.  A larger portion
   of the submitted papers presented and discussed measurement data and
   these submissions provided a good basis get a better understanding of
   the situation, covering different angles and aspects of network
   traffic and kind of networks.

3.1.1.  Overall traffic growth

   Based on the measurement data of one ISP, three IXPs, a metropolitan
   educational network, and a mobile operator it was observed at the
   beginning of the workshop that overall the network was able to handle
   the situation well despite a significant and sudden increase in
   traffic growth rate in March/April.  In many regions the traffic
   growth expected in a typical year took place in the matter of a few
   weeks.  In access networks, the growth rate of upstream traffic also
   exceeded the growth in downstream traffic, reflecting increased
   adoption and use of video conferencing and other remote work and
   school applications.

3.1.2.  Changes in traffic patterns

   At a high level, the traffic in mobile network decreased as a result
   of reduced population mobility while traffic from home network
   increased.  As a result of the shift for working and learning at
   home, there was a strong increase in video conferencing and remote
   learning application traffic.  The typical diurnal usage patters in
   network also changed, with peak times occuring earlier in the day and
   peak times lasting longer over the day - once again reflecting the
   start of the work or school day from home.

3.1.2.1.  Example campus network

   Changes in traffic have been observed at University campus networks
   as well, especially due to the necessary adoption of remote teaching.
   The Politecnico di Torino University (Italy) deployed its in-house
   solution for remote teaching, which caused the outgoing traffic to
   grow by 2.5 times, driven by more than 600 daily online classes.
   Incoming traffic, instead, decreased by a factor of 10 due to the
   stop of any in-presence activity.  Based on their measurements, this
   change in traffic and network usage did however not lead to
   noticeable performance impairments, nor significantly poor
   performance have been observed for students in remote regions of
   Italy.  Further, outgoing traffic increased as well due to remote
   working solutions such as collaboration platforms, VPNs and remote
   desktop.




Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


3.1.2.2.  Example mobile networks

   Mobile network data usage appeared to decline following the
   imposition of localized lockdown measures, as these reduced typical
   levels of mobility and roaming.

   [more text TBD]

3.1.3.  A deeper look at interconnections

   Traffic at points of network interconnection noticeably increased but
   most operators reacted quickly by rapidly adding additional capacity.
   The amount of increases varied, with some networks that hosted
   popular applications such as video conferencing experiencing traffic
   growth of several hundred to several thousand percent.

   Measurements of interconnection links at major US ISPs by CAIDA and
   MIT found some evidence of diurnal congestion around the March 2020
   timeframe, but most of this congestion disappeared in a few weeks,
   which suggests that operators indeed did take steps to add capacity
   or otherwise mitigate the congestion.

3.1.4.  Cloud platforms

   Cloud infrastructure played a key role in supporting bandwidth-
   intensive video conferencing and remote learning tools to practice
   social distancing in COVID-19 pandemic.  Network congestion between
   cloud platforms and access networks could impact on the quality of
   experience of these cloud-based applications.  CAIDA leveraged web-
   based speed test servers to perform download and upload throughput
   measurements from virtual machines in public cloud platforms to
   various access ISPs in the United States [Mok2020].

   The key findings included: * Persistent congestion events were not
   widely observed between cloud platforms and these networks,
   particular for large-scale ISPs, but we could observe large diurnal
   download throughput variations in peak hours from some locations to
   the cloud. * There is evidence of persistent congestion in the egress
   direction to regional ISPs serving suburban areas in the U.S.  Their
   users could suffer from poor video streaming or file download
   performance from the cloud. * The macroscopic analysis over 3 months
   (June-August, 2020) revealed downward trends in download throughput
   from ISPs and educational networks to certain cloud regions.  We
   believed that increased use of the cloud in the pandemic could be one
   of the factors that contributed to the decreased performance.






Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


3.1.5.  Last mile congestion

   Last-mile is the centerpiece of broadband connectivity, where poor
   last-mile performance generally translates to poor quality of
   experience.  In a recent IMC'20 research paper Fontugne et al.
   investigated last-mile latency using traceroute data from RIPE Atlas
   probes located in 646 ASes and looked for recurrent performance
   degradation [Fontugne2020-1].  They found that in normal times Atlas
   probes in only 10% ASes experience persistent last-mile congestion
   but they recorded 55% more congested ASes during the COVID-19
   outbreak.  This deterioration caused by stay-at-home measures is
   particularly marked in large eyeball networks and certain parts of
   the world.  They found Japan to be the most impacted country in their
   study looking specifically at NTT OCN, but noting similar
   observations for several Japanese networks, including IIJ (AS2497).

   From mid-2020 onwards, they however observe better performance than
   before the pandemic.  In Japan, this is partly due to the deployments
   originally planned for accommodating the Tokyo Olympics, and more
   generally, it reflects the efforts of network operators to cope with
   these exceptional circumstances.  The pandemic has demonstrated that
   its adaptive design and proficient community can keep the Internet
   operational during such unprecedented events.  Also, from the
   numerous research and operational reports recently published, the
   pandemic is apparently shaping a more resilient Internet, as
   Nietzsche wrote, "What does not kill me makes me stronger".

3.1.6.  Home network performance

3.1.7.  User behaviour

   The type of traffic needed by the users also changed in 2020.
   Upstream traffic increased due the use of video conferences, remote
   schooling, and similar applications.  The NCTA and Comcast reported
   that while downstream traffic grew 20%, upstream traffic grew as much
   as 30% to 37% [NCTA2020] [Comcast2020].  Vodafone reported that
   upstream traffic grew 100% in some markets [Vodafone2020].

   Ericsson's Consumer Lab surveyed users for their usage and
   experiences during the crisis).  Some of the key findings in
   [ConsumerlabReport2020] were:

   *  9 in 10 users increased Internet activities, and time spent
      connected increased.  In addition, 1 in 5 started new online
      activities, many in the older generation felt that they were
      helped by video calling, parents felt that their children's
      education was helped, and so on.




Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   *  Network performance was in general found satisfactory. 6 in 10
      were very satisfied with fixed broadband, and 3 in 4 felt that
      mobile broadband was same or better as before the crisis.
      Consumers valued resilience and quality of service as the most
      important task for network operators.

   *  Smartphone application usage changed, with fastest growth was in
      COVID-19, remote working, e-learning, wellness, education, remote
      health consultation, and social shared experience applications.
      Biggest decreases were in travel and booking, ride hailing,
      location, and parking applications.

   Some of the behaviours are likely permanent changes
   [ConsumerlabReport2020].  The adoption of video calls and other new
   services by many consumers, such as the older generation, is likely
   going to have a long-lasting effect.  Surveys in various
   organizations point to a likely long-term increase in the number of
   people interested in remote work [WorkplaceAnalytics2020]
   [McKinsey2020].

3.2.  Operational Practises and Changes

   The second day of the workshop focussed on operational issues.

3.2.1.  Digital Divide

   Measurements from Fastly confirmed that Internet traffic volume, in
   multiple countries, rose rapidly at the same time as COVID cases
   increased and lock down policies came into effect.  Download speeds
   also decreased, but in a much less dramatic fashion than overall
   bandwidth usage increased.  School closures led to dramatic increase
   in traffic volume in many regions, and other public policy
   announcements triggered large traffic shifts.  This suggests that
   governments might usefully coordinate with operators to allow time
   for pre-emptive operational changes, in some cases.

   Measurements from the US showed that download rates correlate with
   income levels.  However, download rates in the lowest income zip
   codes increased as the pandemic progressed, closing the divide with
   higher income areas.  One possible reason for this in the data is
   decisions by some ISPs, such as Comcast and Cox, that increased
   speeds for users on certain plans and in certain areas.  This
   suggests that network capacity was available, and that the
   correlation between income and download rates was not necessarily due
   to differences in the deployed infrastructure in different regions,
   although it was noted that certainly access link technologies provide
   more flexibility than others in this regard.




Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


3.2.2.  Applications

   The web conferencing systems (e.g., Microsoft Teams, Zoom, Webex) saw
   incredible growth, with overnight traffic increases of 15-20% in
   response to public policy changes, such as lock downs.  This required
   significant and rapid changes in infrastructure provisioning.

   Major video providers (YouTube, etc.) reduced bandwidth by 25% in
   some regions.  It was suggested that this had a huge impact on
   quality of videoconferencing systems until networks could scale to
   handle full bit-rate, but other operators of some other services saw
   limited impact.

   Updates to popular games has a significant impact on network load.
   Some discussions reported between ISPs, CDNs, and gaming industry on
   possibly coordinating various high-bandwidth update events, similar
   to what was done for entertainment/video download speeds.  Difficult
   interplay between bulk download and interactive real-time
   applications, potentially due to buffer-bloat and queuing delays.

3.2.3.  Observability

   Clear that there is a contrast in experience.  Many operators
   reported few problems, in terms of metrics such as measured download
   bandwidth, while video conferencing applications experienced
   usability significant problems running on those networks (defined as
   more than 1s/min of major artefacts).  The interaction between
   application providers and network providers worked very smoothly to
   resolve these issues, supported by strong personal contacts and
   relationships.  But it seems clear that the metrics used by many
   operators to understand their network performance don't fully capture
   the impact on certain applications, and there is an observability
   gap.

3.3.  Architectural Consideration and Conclusion for Future

   TBD...

3.3.1.  DSCP point and counterpoint

   TBD...

3.3.2.  Security

   From Kirsty et al.






Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


3.3.3.  Discussion

   Incentive and control (Jana)...

   TBD...

3.3.4.  Feedback on meeting format

   TBD...

3.4.  Conclusions

   There is a wealth of data about the performance of the Internet
   during the crises.  The main conclusion from the various measurements
   is that fairly large shifts occurred.  And those shifts were not
   merely about changing one application for another, they actually
   impacted traffic flows and directions, and caused in many cases a
   significant traffic increase.  Early reports also seem to indicate
   that the shifts have went relatively smoothly from the point of view
   overall consumer experience.

   An important but not so visible factor that led to this was that many
   people and organizations where highly motivated to ensure good
   experience.  A lot of collaboration happened in the background,
   problems were corrected, many providers significantly increased their
   capacity, and so on.

   In general, the Internet also seems well suited for adapting to new
   situations, at least within some bounds.  The Internet is designed
   for any application and situation, rather than optimized for today's
   particular traffic.  This makes it possible to use it for many
   applications, in many deployment situations, and make changes as
   needed.  The generality is present in many parts of the overall
   system, from basic Internet technology to browsers, from name servers
   to content delivery networks and cloud platforms.  When needs change,
   what is needed is often merely different services, perhaps some re-
   allocation of resources, but not fundamental technology or hardware
   changes.

   On the other hand, this is not to say that no improvements are
   needed:










Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   *  Better understanding of the health of the Internet: Going forward,
      the critical nature that Internet plays in our lives means that
      the health of the Internet needs to receive significant attention.
      Understanding how well networks work is not just a technical
      matter, it is also of crucial importance to the people and economy
      of the societies using it.  Projects and research that monitor
      Internet and services performance in a broad scale and across
      different networks are therefore important.

   *  The pandemic has shown how the effects of the digital divide can
      be amplified during a crisis.  More attention is needed to ensure
      that broadband is available to all, and that Internet services
      equally serve different groups.

   *  We need to continue work on all the other improvements that are
      seen necessary anyway, such as further improvements in security,
      ability for networks and applications to collaborate better, etc.

   *  Informal collaboration between different parties needs to continue
      and be strengthened.

4.  Position Papers

   The following position papers were received, in alphabetical order:

   *  Afxanasyev, A., Wang, L., Yeh, E., Zhang, B., and Zhang, L.:
      Identifying the Disease from the Symptoms: Lessons for Networking
      in the COVID-19 Era [Afxanasyev2020]

   *  Arkko, Jari: Observations on Network User Behaviour During
      COVID-19 [Arkko2020]

   *  Bronzino, F., Culley, E., Feamster, N.  Liu. S., Livingood.  J.,
      and Schmitt, P.: IAB COVID-19 Workshop: Interconnection Changes in
      the United States [Bronzino2020]

   *  Campling, Andrew and Lazanski, Dominique: Will the Internet Still
      Be Resilient During the Next Black Swan Event?  [Campling2020]

   *  Cho, Kenjiro: On the COVID-19 Impact to broadband traffic in Japan
      [Cho2020]

   *  Clark, D.: Measurement of congestion on ISP interconnection links
      [Clark2020]

   *  Favale, T., Soro, F., Trevisan, M., Drago, I., and Mellia, M.:
      Campus traffic and e-Learning during COVID-19 pandemic
      [Favale2020]



Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   *  Feldmann, A., Gasser, O., Lichtblau, F., Pujol, E., Poese, I.,
      Dietzel, C., Wagner, D., Wichtlhuber, M., Tapiador, J., Vallina-
      Rodriguez, N., Hohlfeld, O., and Smaragdakis, G.: A view of
      Internet Traffic Shifts at ISP and IXPs during the COVID-19
      Pandemic [Feldmann2020]

   *  Fontugne, R., Shah, A., and Cho, K.: The Impact of COVID-19 on
      Last-mile Latency [Fontugne2020]

   *  Gillmor, D.: Vaccines, Privacy, Software Updates, and Trust
      [Gillmor2020]

   *  Gu, Y. and Li, Z.  Covid 19 Impact on China ISP's Network Traffic
      Pattern and Solution Discussion [Gu2020]

   *  Jennings, C. and Kozanian, P.: WebEx Scaling During Covid
      [Jennings2020]

   *  Lutu, A., Perino, D., Bagnulo, M., Frias-Martinez, E., and
      Khangosstar, J.: A Characterization of the COVID-19 Pandemic
      Impact on a Mobile Network Operator Traffic [Lutu2020]

   *  Mok, Ricky, and claffy, kc: Measuring the impact of COVID-19 on
      cloud network performance [Mok2020]

   *  Kirsty P: IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts [Kirsty2020]

5.  Workshop participants

   The following is an alphabetical list of participants in the
   workshop.

   *  Jari Arkko (Ericsson/IAB)

   *  Ben Campbell (Independent/IAB)

   *  Andrew Campling (419 Consulting)

   *  Kenjiro Cho (IIJ)

   *  kc Claffy (CAIDA)

   *  David Clark (MIT CSAIL)

   *  Chris Dietzel (DE-CIX)

   *  Idilio Drago (University of Turin)




Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   *  Stephen Farrell (Trinity College Dublin/IAB)

   *  Nick Feamster (University of Chicago)

   *  Anja Feldmann (Max Planck Institute for Informatics)

   *  Romain Fontugne (IIJ Research Lab)

   *  Oliver Gasser (Max Planck Institute for Informatics)

   *  Daniel Kahn Gillmor (ACLU)

   *  Yunan Gu (Huawei)

   *  Oliver Hohlfeld (Brandenburg University of Technology, BTU)

   *  Jana Iyengar (Fastly)

   *  Cullen Jennings (Cisco/IAB)

   *  Mirja Kuhlewind (Ericsson/IAB)

   *  Franziska Lichtblau (Max Planck Institute for Informatics)

   *  Dominique Lazanski

   *  Zhenbin Li (Huawei/IAB)

   *  Jason Livingood (Comcast)

   *  Andra Lutu (Telefonica Research)

   *  Vesna Manojlovic (RIPE NCC)

   *  R Martin EC (?)

   *  Matt Matthis (Google)

   *  Larry Masinter (Retired)

   *  Jared Mauch (Akamai/IAB)

   *  Deep Medhi (NSF)

   *  Marco Mellia (Politecnico di Torino)

   *  Ricky Mok (CAIDA)




Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   *  Karen O'Donoghue (Internet Society)

   *  Kirsty P (NCSC)

   *  Diego Perino (Telefonica Research)

   *  Colin Perkins (University of Glasgow/IRTF/IAB)

   *  Enric Pujol (Benocs)

   *  Anant Shah (Verizon Media Platform)

   *  Francesca Soro (Politecnico di Torino)

   *  Brian Trammell (Google)

   *  Gergios Tselentis (European Commission)

   *  Martino Trevisan

   *  Lan Wang (University of Memphis)

   *  Rob Wilton (Cisco)

   *  Jiankang Yao (CNNIC)

   *  Lixia Zhang (UCLA)

6.  Program Committee

   The workshop Program Committee members were Jari Arkko, Stephen
   Farrell, Cullen Jennings, Colin Perkins, Ben Campbell, and Mirja
   Kuehlewind.

7.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the workshop participants, the
   members of the IAB, the program committee, the participants in the
   architecture discussion list for interesting discussions, and Cindy
   Morgan for the practical arrangements.

   Further special thanks to those participants who also contributed to
   this report: Romain Fontugne provided text based on his blog post at
   https://eng-blog.iij.ad.jp/archives/7722; Ricky Mok for text on cloud
   platform; Martino Trevisan for text on campus networks; David Clark
   on congestion measurements at interconnects.

8.  Informative References



Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   [Afxanasyev2020]
              Afxanasyev, A., Wang, L., Yeh, E., Zhang, B., and L.
              Zhang, "Identifying the Disease from the Symptoms: Lessons
              for Networking in the COVID-19 Era", Position paper in the
              2020 IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. , October
              2020.

   [Arkko2020]
              Arkko, J., "Observations on Network User Behaviour During
              COVID-19", Position paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network
              Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [Bronzino2020]
              Bronzino, F., Culley, E., Feamster, N., Liu, S.,
              Livingood, J., and P. Schmitt, "IAB COVID-19 Workshop:
              Interconnection Changes in the United States", Position
              paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. ,
              October 2020.

   [Campling2020]
              Campling, A. and D. Lazanski, "Will the Internet Still Be
              Resilient During the Next Black Swan Event?", Position
              paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. ,
              October 2020.

   [Cho2020]  Cho, K., "On the COVID-19 Impact to broadband traffic in
              Japan", Position paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network
              Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [Clark2020]
              Clark, D., "Measurement of congestion on ISP
              interconnection links", Position paper in the 2020 IAB
              COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [Comcast2020]
              Comcast, ., "COVID-19 Network Update",
              https://corporate.comcast.com/covid-19/network/may-20-2020
              , May 2020.

   [ConsumerlabReport2020]
              Ericsson Consumer & IndustryLab, ., "Keeping consumers
              connected in a COVID-19 context",
              https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-
              papers/consumerlab/reports/keeping-consumers-connected-
              during-the-covid-19-crisis , June 2020.






Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   [Favale2020]
              Favale, T., Soro, F., Trevisan, M., Drago, I., and M.
              Mellia, "Campus traffic and e-Learning during COVID-19
              pandemic", Position paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network
              Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [Feldmann2020]
              Feldmann, A., Gasser, O., Lichtblau, F., Pujol, E., Poese,
              I., Dietzel, C., Wagner, D., Wichtlhuber, M., Tapiador,
              J., N Vallina-Rodriguez, ., Hohlfeld, O., and G.
              Smaragdakis, "A view of Internet Traffic Shifts at ISP and
              IXPs during the COVID-19 Pandemic", Position paper in the
              2020 IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. , October
              2020.

   [Fontugne2020]
              Fontugne, R., Shah, A., and K. Cho, "The Impact of
              COVID-19 on Last-mile Latency", Position paper in the 2020
              IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [Fontugne2020-1]
              Fontugne, R., Shah, A., and K. Cho, "Persistent Last-mile
              Congestion: Not so Uncommon", Proceedings of the ACM
              Internet Measurement Conference (IMC '20) , October 2020.

   [Gillmor2020]
              Gillmor, D., "Vaccines, Privacy, Software Updates, and
              Trust", Position paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network
              Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [Gu2020]   Gu, Y. and Z. Li, "Covid 19 Impact on China ISP's Network
              Traffic Pattern and Solution Discussion", Position paper
              in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. ,
              October 2020.

   [Jennings2020]
              Jennings, C. and P. Kozanian, "WebEx Scaling During
              Covid", Position paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network
              Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [Kirsty2020]
              Kirsty P, ., "IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts", Position
              paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. ,
              October 2020.







Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   [Lutu2020] Lutu, A., Perino, D., Bagnulo, M., Frias-Martinez, E., and
              J. Khangosstar, "A Characterization of the COVID-19
              Pandemic Impact on a Mobile Network Operator Traffic",
              Position paper in the 2020 IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts
              workshop. , October 2020.

   [McKinsey2020]
              Boland, B., De Smet, A., Palter, R., and A. Sanghvi,
              "Reimagining the office and work life after COVID-19", htt
              ps://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Function
              s/Organization/Our%20Insights/Reimagining%20the%20office%2
              0and%20work%20life%20after%20COVID%2019/Reimagining-the-
              office-and-work-life-after-COVID-19-final.pdf , June 2020.

   [Mok2020]  Mok, R. and . kc claffy, "Measuring the impact of COVID-19
              on cloud network performance", Position paper in the 2020
              IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts workshop. , October 2020.

   [NCTA2020] NCTA, ., "COVID-19: How Cable's Internet Networks Are
              Performing: Metrics, Trends & Observations",
              https://www.ncta.com/COVIDdashboard , 2020.

   [Vodafone2020]
              Vodafone, ., "An update on Vodafone's networks",
              https://www.vodafone.com/covid19/news/update-on-vodafone-
              networks , April 2020.

   [WorkplaceAnalytics2020]
              Lister, K., "Work-At-Home After Covid-19—Our Forecast",
              https://globalworkplaceanalytics.com/work-at-home-after-
              covid-19-our-forecast , 2020.

Authors' Addresses

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson

   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com


   Stephen Farrell
   Trinity College Dublin

   Email: stephen.farrell@cs.tcd.ie







Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft  IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop 20    January 2021


   Mirja Kühlewind
   Ericsson

   Email: mirja.kuehlewind@ericsson.com


   Colin Perkins
   University of Glasgow

   Email: csp@csperkins.org









































Arkko, et al.             Expires 2 August 2021                [Page 18]
